experiment-notes/todos.md, before:

- [ ] make notes from experiment results
- [ ] Implement `--continue-training` 
- [ ] read NVAE paper
	- Residual Gaussian dist parameterization
	- KL balancing coeffs
	- KL warm-up
	- Spectral reg ?
	- How BU and TD nets are treated ?
- [ ] Read VACA paper https://arxiv.org/pdf/2110.14690.pdf

Spatial latents vs. Concepual latents

I'm running into problems associated with training large scale (hierarchical) VAEs. 

It seems that HVAEs use rather wide latent layers that definitely can't correspond to concrete conceptual latents. 

Niether CommAss not LadderVAEs trained on CelebA. ( Which networks did train on CelebA ?)

One of the problems with current implementations is that they don't respect the typical CNN hierarchical feature extraction assumption. Because of DAG structure the BottomUp Networks can be or arbitrary width, and if we only have 1 root node it introduces severe bottleneck. In normal CNNs the network width gradually decrease, but in BUNets it doesn't follow any predictable pattern. Subsequent layer can have lower of higher width depending on concepts in corresponding DAG layer. I need to separate hierarchical image features and conceptual latents. It feels that the network is having a hard time extracting and remembering anything meaningful. BU layer is not able to extract anything meaningful.

Commit message:

added Toy Dataset and Arch, Impl. continue training, Imp. LogVar graphs

experiment-notes/todos.md, after:

- [ ] make notes from experiment results
- [ ] Implement `--continue-training` and test it with `tensorboard`
- [ ] read NVAE paper
	- Residual Gaussian dist parameterization
	- KL balancing coeffs
	- KL warm-up
	- Spectral reg ?
	- How BU and TD nets are treated ?
- [ ] Read VACA paper https://arxiv.org/pdf/2110.14690.pdf
- [ ] Check BUnet activations, check sigmas

Spatial latents vs. Concepual latents

I'm running into problems associated with training large scale (hierarchical) VAEs. 

It seems that HVAEs use rather wide latent layers that definitely can't correspond to concrete conceptual latents. 

Niether CommAss not LadderVAEs trained on CelebA. ( Which networks did train on CelebA ?)

One of the problems with current implementations is that they don't respect the typical CNN hierarchical feature extraction assumption. Because of DAG structure the BottomUp Networks can be or arbitrary width, and if we only have 1 root node it introduces severe bottleneck. In normal CNNs the network width gradually decrease, but in BUNets it doesn't follow any predictable pattern. Subsequent layer can have lower of higher width depending on concepts in corresponding DAG layer. I need to separate hierarchical image features and conceptual latents. It feels that the network is having a hard time extracting and remembering anything meaningful. BU layer is not able to extract anything meaningful.

In DSprites for example, I'm projecting down the whole image $X$ into 2 units in the first BottomUp layer. 1 for mu and the other for sigma, then the next layer projects up to 4 dimensions. But the information is already lost. DAG structure doesn't correspond to how NN's process information. A careful rethinking of architecture is needed that respects DAG constraints while also being mindful of NN information flow and how it processes it.

Getting a strong urge to build a small toynet with known correlated generative process and then apply a simple VAE to it. Least then I will be able to make clear sense of stuff and have more control over "latent-concep-to-unit-mapping". DSprites, while simple is still far to complicated of a dataset to try a whole new architecture on. This has an additional advantage that I won't run into VAE scaling issue.
